# The Wall <!-- {docsify-ignore} -->
----

Of all the artefacts the ancients left littered across the cerulean sands of Vaarn, few are more imposing than the canted bulwark of pale ferrosteel that is known variously as the Great Wall of Vaarn, the Weeping Wall, the Backbone of the Gods, the Titanspine, or the Impediment. The Wall forms the western boundary of the trackless Vaarnish Interior, an artificial mountain range visible from a month’s ride away. At a distance it appears to be a colourless, irregular blockade that roils uneasily in the heat haze, more akin to the fortress-walls of ice that girdle the Urth’s polar regions than any work of human hands. Up close the Wall is more impressive still, a colossal ruin that exceeds four leagues in height, dwarfing even the Lazul Mountains that embrace its northern limit. The grasping white towers that crown the summit of the edifice reach beyond the stratosphere, although the creatures that roost upon these spires do not need oxygen to survive.

Suffice to say the Wall is large; an edifice so vast that it constitutes a biosphere apart from the rest of Vaarn, and there are peoples that dwell within its recesses to whom this construct is a universe unto itself, removed from the cares of those outside. These Wallborn live and die in a vertiginous world of passageways, shafts, vents, chutes, and great ferrosteel canyons built at scale far beyond the imagining of any man, in which their towns and keeps nestle like wasp hives in the eaves of an abandoned granary. Many of those born in the highest reaches of the Wall have never touched the ground, and these subjects of the Queen Beyond the Sky would die before they let the blue sands sully their feet. The Wallborn are expert climbers, having modified their bodies with prehensile tails and extra hands where the feet once were, and they are as confident traversing great heights as the great apes, thinking nothing of rushing across a knotted bridge of cables with a drop of a league or more beneath them. The purpose the ancients intended for this mighty construct is obscure, although most scholars believe the Great Wall to be a dysfunctional component of one of the Titan AIs, and given the sophistication of the engineering contained within it is difficult to dispute this notion. The construct has been described as a colossal neural cord, intended to transfer monumental quantities of data between disparate minds. The Wall appears to have served a secondary function as a coolant intake, and it is due to this purpose that it is able to sustain human populations within its bounds. The Wall draws in saltwater from the Sea of Songs, and transforms the liquid into pale ikor, the blood of the Machine Gods. The Wallborn drink deep of this ikor, which is ‘like nectar - it is sweet and fresh and filling, a superior fluid to water in all respects’ according to Idris Ida-Null, the lost Hegemony Cartographer. The veins that carry this liquid are riddled with leaks and breakages, and ikor runs freely down the interior surfaces of the Wall. It spills in trickles during some phases of the moon and in great rushing floods on other days, according to the cyclical operation of the Wall’s pumps. The sites of these ikor weeps are sought after and guarded, just as the oases in the badlands of Vaarn are coveted, for the Wallborn use ikor to nourish their livestock and irrigate the hanging gardens in which they grow many fruits.

There is a second type of ikor transported through the Wall - sable ikor, the Black Drink, a toxic brew too potent for any human to imbibe and live. It is whispered that certain abhuman entities covet this substance, for reasons obscure and likely inauspicious.

## Cities of the Wall

Two ancient and squabbling cities roost inside the Wall. The lower of the twinned polities is **Sargattea, the Narrow City**. Sargattea has grown like a scab around a wound in the Wall, a rusted fissure rent by some unknown power in the distant past. This passageway is the only method by which trade caravans can reach the ocean from the Vaarnish Interior, without taking a detour of hundreds of leagues through the mountains or into the toxic mangrove-labyrinth of Ikor Quag. Sargattea holds the Rusted Pass, and the lascannon of the Sargattean Guard will rain fire upon any who attempt the crossing without paying tribute.

What can be said of the Narrow City? The polity is known for its passions and its appetites. Sargatteans are famous for their bombastic poetry, for their rich wine and ornate musical romances, for the fiery and elaborate meals they prepare for guests, and for their daredevil antics on the battlefield, in business, and in their bedchambers. A Sargattean who takes no lovers outside marriage is thought, or so it is claimed, to be letting the city down.

Sargatteans are famous also for beetle husbandry: the city breeds pack- and war-beetles of prodigious size and excellent discipline, and these insects are one of Sargattea’s major exports. The Narrow City is influenced both by the culture of the deep deserts, and by the peoples who live on the shores of Vaarn: a marriage of sand and salt, as those fond of Sargattea are heard to say. In this way the lower of the Wall’s cities is a place that embodies transformation, for travellers are forever passing through, sailors and nomads and merchants and guildsmen moving from the ocean to the desert or from the desert to the ocean. The Narrow City is a vast dressing room where actors prepare their costumes for one stage or another.

The loftier of the twin cities is wind-scoured **Ostriel, the City Unconquered**. Ostriel is built in the upper reaches of the Wall, at the site of an ikor weep of great size and ferocity. The Ostrielese are reckoned aloof and haughty by those who trade with them, a reputation Ostriel’s citizens bear with pride. Where the Sargatteans are known as fiery and open, with no threat unvoiced and no compliment ungiven, the Ostrielese are by repute chilly and reserved, a people whose clothes are austere and whose greatest art is understatement.

Ostriel is ruled by flocks of harpies, who gather there in great numbers to honor the Queen Beyond the Sky, the title they give to their matriarch of matriarchs. These feathered chimera own all property and control all trade in the city, and such is their ferocity and their skill in airborne combat that Ostriel has never been conquered. This boast is not made in idleness: Ostriel has gone to war many times, and although the zeppelin armadas of Sargattea have attempted to breach her defences on countless occasions during the fractious relationship between the twin cities, no Sargattean soldier has walked the streets of Ostriel save in chains.

The citizens of Ostriel take great pride in their fierce reputation, believing the harsh weather and thin air of their roosting city to have bred a superior fighting force. The Ostrielese make a custom of never walking upon the ground, and those who must journey to other regions of Vaarn wear holy shoes with a harpy feather engraved on each sole, to symbolically protect them from the impurity that will otherwise seep into their bodies. Of course, the taint of such journeys can never entirely be removed, and ‘travelling’ families occupy a lower rung on the social ladder than those who have never left the heights of the Wall.

The enmity that exists between the two cities is legendary, and innkeepers throughout Vaarn know how to differentiate the accent of Sargattean and Ostrielese travellers, as mistaking one variety of Wallborn for the other can cause lethal offence. Sargatteans mock the citizens of Ostriel as slaves to feathered monsters, making loud jokes of the grotesque and humiliating sacrifices the sky-dwellers make to their harpy queen, while the Ostrielese laugh at Sargattea for the polity’s proximity to the dirt, a place fit, they claim, only for worms, faeces, and corpses.

Wars break out between the two cities with metronomic regularity, and each new generation grows up learning the same litany of outrages and aggressions that have been committed by the other side. Sargattea has won more battles, or so it is claimed, but has never breached the defences of the City Beyond the Sky, whereas Ostrielese armies have sacked the Narrow City on two well-remembered occasions. Sargattea was even subjected to rule by a puppet government of the Harpy Queen.

The occupation ended generations ago, but the scars run deep, and many Sargattean collaborators with the harpy regime fled to Ostriel when their city finally rebelled. These exile families roost there even now, dreaming of the day the Narrow City will be subjugated once more by the Queen Beyond the Sky: the day Sargattea’s zeppelins burn in their bowers and grey-coated Ostrielese air-hussars patrol the streets, the day they can finally return home.

## Using This Issue
This issue of Vaults of Vaarn presents Referees with a new region of Vaarn. The intent is to expand the setting by introducing a location that radically breaks from the established desert wasteland backdrop, while retaining thematic consistency. In some senses, everything about the game world has been reversed: Where the deserts of Vaarn are dry, here fresh water is available in abundance. Where the wastes are flat and open, the Wall’s interiors are tall and cramped. In other senses, nothing has changed: the PCs are still exploring the ruins of a post-apocalyptic, post-human world, where archaic and alien cultures thrive in the enigmatic ruins of the Long Ago.

The Wall can be used as a palette cleanser in a long-running Vaarn campaign, or it can be a campaign setting in itself, with the PCs hailing from the societies that have established themselves within the colossus. In either case, here are a few ideas for campaign hooks and rumours that might draw the PCs to the Great Wall.

### Trail Blazers
The PCs are in the employ of the [Sargattean Guard](the-wall.md#sargattean-guard), attempting to mark out a new trail between Sargattea and an outlying town. The route is to be cleared of hazards and painted with trail lines.

### Sky Pirates
The PCs have been charged with tracking down a group of notorious sky pirates to their zeppelin berth, high in the Upper Wall. Their employer, a merchant, wants her cargo returned intact. Anything else they find in the pirates’ den is theirs to keep.

### Sky Pirates, Redux
Alternatively, the PCs are a crew of sky pirates, mounting daring raids on mercantile zeppelins using their smaller, more nimble craft.

### Sable Ikor
The toxic black sludge that leaks from the Wall’s ducts is highly prized by science-mystics and alchemists across Vaarn. A fresh weep of sable ikor is reported to have sprung, and the PCs are hired by an alchemist to escort them to the source of the leak.

### Agents of the Krypteia
The PCs are operatives for Ostriel’s Secret Police, assassins and informants for the Queen Beyond the Sky (p.18). Enemies of the crown must die. From Sargattea to Ostriel and beyond they ply their dark trade, striking from the shadows in accordance with Chatelaine Occluria’s plans.

### Beetle Ranchers
One of the PCs receives a letter: a distant uncle has died, and left them his beetle ranch! They must travel to the Wall, take up ownership of the ranch, and inherit the ruinous debts that doubtless drove him into an early grave. The only way to clear the debt and honour your uncle’s memory would be to win the Grand Beetle Derby, held once a year in Sargattea.

### Hegemony Spies
The Hegemon, May His Name Resound Forever, has little influence over the affairs of the Wallborn. The military and economic power of Sargattea and Ostriel is such that the Hegemony are locked out of the Wall’s politics. However, the relationship between the cities is always one notch beneath boiling point. A protracted, pointless war between the polities would weaken both, allowing the Hegemon’s Legions to establish a foothold within the Wall. You are charged with ensuring the twin cities go to war.

### Stop the Levellers
They’re always trying to blow something up, but this time it’s different. Rumours swirl that those fanatics dug something up beneath the desert, a weapon that could actually level the Wall. Where are they keeping it? How can they be stopped? The PCs must race against time, aided by Sargattea and Ostriel in grudging alliance.

### Vault Raiders
The PCs are rootless, ruthless vagabonds who rely on their weapons and their wits in equal measure. The Wall is gigantic, and older than the mountains that stand in its shadow. Such a construct doubtless hides all manner of ancient techno-temples and polychromed crypts within its bowels. The priceless relics of a bygone age won’t pillage themselves.

